Every year
we gather and think about many
different themes that are
important to us.
We think about the very good
and
the very bad.
We think about humanity's past.
We sing Bitter Wind Blown
and reflect on what it would be
like to have to light our own
fires for warmth.
We try to imagine what it would
feel like not to know why it
gets cold
or why we get sick
or whether there is anything we
can do about it.
We think about the present.
We share stories of humanity's
astonishing technological
accomplishments
and feats of cooperation over
the last five thousand years.
And sometimes we think about
the present
from another perspective.
Beside our achievements,
we see stretching from the past
into the present
an unbroken thread of suffering,
woven thick with the
experiences of countless souls.
So at the same time,
we must contend with the fact
that we are standing on a
rising pedestal,
flung exponentially higher by
our ancestors,
and that also,
all around us,
unacceptable atrocities
continue.
How are we to make sense of
this?
When confronted with the desire
to understand everything and
the compulsion to ensure the
prosperity of the far future,
how are we to stretch our minds
across both the enormous losses
and enormous gains?
This is a challenge that is
with us in normal times.
This last year
has brought a further
complication to the picture.
With pervasive fear of sickness,
stuttering economies, and our
institutions struggling to
keep their heads above the
water,
it no longer feels like we are
at the apex of human history.
To better understand these
extremes,
we need to deploy the tools of
rationality.
In the third century before the
common era,
a man named Archimedes wrote an
essay called The Sand Reckoner.
The ancient Greeks, you see,
had a term for a large quantity:
a "sand hundred".
The idea was that although you
could
one could see with the naked
eye that sand consisted of
discrete grains,
enumerating all the grains in a
sand dune,
let alone an entire desert, was
beyond possibility.
Beyond human abilities.
But the mind of Archimedes
soared above such imagined
limitations.
He invented a means of
manipulating large numbers,
which today we would call
exponents,
and with these he calculated
the upper bounds
on the number of sand grains in
the whole of the earth,
and indeed,
sand grain volume of the entire
universe
as they believed it to be at
the time.
In this exercise,
Archimedes had reckoned the
sand.
And in bringing the immensity
of the sand inside himself,
he also unleashed the mind of
humanity
onto the universe.
One virtue of rationality is
precision.
And sometimes precision is less
about knowing decimal places,
and more about knowing what
order of magnitude you're on.
Another virtue of rationality
is scholarship.
And the way that I know how to
reckon with today's immensities
is to do research and find
statistics
that tell me something
about what order of magnitude
we're on.
For example,
the Spanish flu of 1918
killed somewhere between twenty
and a hundred million people.
For comparison, malaria kills
about half a million people
per year,
and COVID has killed 1.7
million people.
In the second quarter of this
year,
the US GDP had the largest
decline on record,
and then the third quarter had
the largest increase on record,
although the net of those was
still negative.
It took us
about a year to develop and
begin distributing a vaccine
for COVID.
The previous fastest vaccine
took about four years to
develop, in 1967.
These facts can be objects of
meditation.
They can be devices in your
practice to understand the
world around you,
to orient your mind,
and to choose future actions.
Despite the clarity of specific
numbers,
it can take a long time
100 line:1
to really understand what they
mean.
101 line:1
A lot of exposure is necessary
102 line:1
to take these numbers inside
yourself.
103 line:1
My recommendation
104 line:1
is to think about it lightly
often,
105 line:1
and deeply on occasion.
106 line:1
To think about it lightly often,
107 line:1
perhaps form some associations
that will let you be
108 line:1
incidentally reminded of the
good and the bad.
109 line:1
For example,
110 line:1
whenever I see a plane in the
sky,
111 line:1
I just can't help but stop for
a second,
112 line:1
and follow its path through the
sky with my eyes,
113 line:1
and imagine all the people on
board.
114 line:1
It is truly a miracle that for
a modest sum,
115 line:1
each of those people
116 line:1
can be safely hurled across the
surface of this great Earth,
117 line:1
and in the meantime
118 line:1
admire the tops of clouds.
119 line:1
In contrast,
120 line:1
whenever I walk down the street
and see a padlock,
121 line:1
it reminds me that we have
failed to solve basic
122 line:1
coordination problems between
people.
123 line:1
While there still exist wars
and police,
124 line:1
or even fences and padlocks,
125 line:1
we have not yet finished our
work.
126 line:1
This is a careful balancing
game.
127 line:1
You don't want to be so often
optimistic that you lose your
128 line:1
sense of urgency in building
the future,
129 line:1
and you don't want to be so
despondent that you lose your
130 line:1
will to try.
131 line:1
Minds vary in their makeup,
132 line:1
so experiment at your own
discretion.
133 line:1
For me,
134 line:1
these associations are a light
reminder,
135 line:1
almost a subconscious one,
136 line:1
which give me
137 line:1
the opportunity to choose
138 line:1
how deeply I want to reflect.
139 line:1
The more you traverse the
orders of magnitude,
140 line:1
the more familiar they become,
141 line:1
and the more you will be
oriented to
142 line:1
the exponential reality.
143 line:1
And tonight
144 line:1
is a time to consider it more
deeply.
145 line:1
So for now,
146 line:1
I will leave you with one more
statistic
147 line:1
on which to reflect in silence
148 line:1
for the next minute.
149 line:1
The global death rate
150 line:1
is about 107 people every
minute,
151 line:1
or just under
152 line:1
2 people each second.
153 line:1
This year,
154 line:1
deaths from COVID have added
about 3 deaths for each of
155 line:1
those minutes.